---
layout: post
published: false
title: The Computer Science Monoculture
summary: 
---

Way too many people have a picture in their mind of what a computer science
student "should" be, including colleagues whose opinions I greatly respect.  The
culture around computer science is the result of naked capitalism.  It's a
lucrative field both academically and industrially.  A high school student who
likes math and wants to make a good living could naturally choose CS.  This has
led to increasingly many students applying to CS programs, and CS programs
naturally selected the most likely to succeed from their growing applicant
pools.  These conditions have been present long enough to form a self sustaining
cycle where CS professors expect their students to uphold the high standard
expected of them when they were undergrads.

Many people believe that's exactly how it should be, and I'm inclined to agree
except for a big caveat that is the subject of this essay.  Industry has no
doubt benefited from an endless stream of pre-screened and pre-trained
programmers.  Undeniably the overall quality of a field is bolstered by many
smart people's interest in it.  My issue is the self-reinforcing picture of what
a computer science student looks like excludes many smart, valuable people.
People in every field naturally hire/accept/like people who look, think, and act
like them, but in CS that way of thinking is particularly prevalent.  It is the
moral obligation of every person to fight this instinct.  This obligation is
especially strong for computer scientists since it has led to harmful biases in
our culture.

## The boy genius programmer

I have a confession to make: I never programmed before undergrad.  Sure, I
played around with HTML and made a few websites, but I had no idea what a
for-loop was.  Luckily (or unluckily) I didn't get into a top-whatever school
and my classmates were generally even greener than me.  I've come to realize
through informal conversations and learning about our Bridge Program that
students are de facto considered to have programming experience in their very
first 100-level CS class here at Purdue.  My impression is first year CS here is a
trial-by-fire, and a knot forms in my stomach when I try to image how 18 year old
me would have handled it.

There's nothing wrong with tough classes and I take pride in Purdue's
reputation, but we should ask ourselves if this situation has occurred by design
or chance. The idea that students need to have experience in your major before
classes even begin is, as far as I know, unique to CS.  We don't expect freshman
dentistry students to have drilled cavities.  There exceptions in
that departments are allowed to assume applicants have the background knowledge
provided by the core high school curriculum.  For instance, math departments
might reasonably expect their applications to have taken Pre-Calculus.
Programming or computer science classes are not part of the high school
curriculum in the USA.  My high school had no programming classes.  

The expectation that incoming freshman have already programmed excludes huge
swaths of people.  People whose high school didn't offer classes like mine
didn't (and for the record I did not grow up in a poor area).  People whose
parents are not programmers, so they never thought about it.  People who are
teenagers and act like teenagers and don't think about their career until
they're forced to pick a major.  

We should not make classes easier, or let students with lesser grades graduate,
but set proper expectations.  In the very first CS course, when a student who
has never seen Java before doesn't do as well as a student whose dad taught him
Java when he was 12, it does not indicate anything about either student's
potential.  It is the instructor's, TA's, and department's responsibility to
make that clear to the first student.  Programming is a learned skill and it's
possible to catch up. 

## CS undergrad as vocational training

CS is both blessed and cursed by it being economically useful.

This is worth learning because it's an interview question

Sixty hour weeks are the norm

College as vocational training

