---
layout: post
published: false
title: How To Grad School
summary: 
---

#Motivation and Work/Life Balance

Even when you are not working, you are working.  Did you stay up late, or drink
too much alcohol, or have a bad sleep pattern that negatively effected your next
work day?  You "worked" last night.  Assuming your PhD takes five years you have
10,000 hours (50 weeks a year * 5 days a week * five years * 8 hours a day).
Your goal is to get as much high-quality work done in those 10,000 hours as possible.

##Healthy Life Style

No, you cannot work 12/14/16 hour days everyday for five years straight.  Anyone
who says they can be in top form on "four hours of sleep" over an extended
period is full of shit.  NASA/the US military/CIA/etc would love to have
their grunts be awake 20 hours a day.  If their years of massive research
budgets haven't yielded a way to do good work while sleeping four hours a night,
it's not possible under modern medicine.  You can read accounts of forced sleep
deprivation in military training.  Without enough sleep, you eventually
hallucinate.  If a Navy Seal cannot march in a line through the woods
under sleep deprivation, do you think you can write a research paper under sleep
deprivation? 

Your default lifestyle should be 9am to 5pm Monday through Friday, with adequate
sleep, a healthy diet, and moderate exercise.  You should go into your lab and
sit at your desk.  You should eat lunch with, and get to know your labmates.  

##Grad School is Work

You cannot get through grad school on "passion" alone.  Every single job
(including graduate school) requires work that no one on earth is passionate
about.  You love coding?  OK, that's great, but do you love doing the 3rd
revision of some paper you wrote two years ago because you didn't cite some
tangentially related paper from the 1990s that Reviewer C asked for?
Even if you like every aspect of research, do you like teaching?  Do you like
being a TA?  Does anyone like grading papers on a Saturday so you can get some
actual research done on Monday?  No.  You will eventually need to "grind"
through work you do not enjoy during your PhD to get to the fun parts. 

##People Lie about How Hard they Work

In academia, and sometimes in software engineering, it's "cool" to work insane
hours and "love your job" and generally humble-brag about how amazing you are at
working.  Everyone should like their work and push themselves, but these people
are lying to you and themselves if that this is actually the way to produce the
highest quality work.  In any case, you are you and they are them.  If sleeping
eight hours a day and not working weekends is what you need to do, do it.  How
many people do you think look back at their life and say, "I wish I would have
spent more of my weekends working?"

I think the sentence, "You don't have to say what you are," is profoundly
insightful.  Michael Jordan doesn't go around telling people, "I'm the best
basketball player ever."  He *is* the basketball player ever so he doesn't *have
to* say it.  If the academic is so smart and works so hard and all that, it
should be obvious.  The academic has to tell every person he meets he is
working so hard all the time precisely because his supposedly Herculean effort
does not result in outwardly observable achievements.  If sacrificing everything
else in your life for work does not lead to obvious tangible benefits, is it worth
it to you?

#The Myth of the Technical Genius

You cannot succeed in academia purely on technical skills.  You will have to
learn politics, marketing, and networking to get the important people to read
your work, then your technical skills matter.  Academia is made of people and
people are not robots.  I have not seen any evidence the adademia is any more
objective or rational than any other field.  People are much more likely to
think an a project is good if that project being good makes them look smart.

##Academics are Narcissists 

What is thing that the academic wants?  Not salary, industry pays more.  To
spread knowledge?  Most faculty actively hate teaching and most papers are
paywalled, so no.  Think about it.  What does every conference, every department
and every group of two or more academics do?  Hand out awards.  The currency of
academia is honorifics and the esteem the honorifics extract your the academic's
peers.

You should always be aware of how your work effects the reputation of others.
If your paper makes the work of a reviewer look bad, he's is more likely to give
you a bad review.  If your paper makes the work of a reviewer look good or
important or cites the reviewer's papers, he is more likely to give you a good
review.  

#What is getting a PhD Actually?

To get a PhD you need to fulfill your department's requirements.  You need to pass
some number of classes with a minimum GPA, pass a few oral exams, and get four
faculty to sign a piece of paper that says you wrote a thesis.  That is all.
Every thing you do move you towards checking off one of those boxes.  Everything
else is, in varying degrees, a distraction.

##Nobody Likes Classes

Get the minimum GPA and move on with your life.  A PhD is about research.

##Nobody Likes Preliminary/Qualifying/Final Exams

You should try to do as well on these as possible as they are practice for your
"real" job -- doing research and convincing other
people that your research is good.  But again, nobody wants to spend their
precious time in examinations.  Everybody wants to be doing research.

##The Beginning of Everyone's PhD is The Same

You begin your PhD full of hopes and dreams.  Virtually everyone starts out
thinking they will be (or might want to be) faculty.  It's numerically
impossible for every grad student to get a faculty position and your advisor
knows this.  However, I've never heard an advisor tell a student, "Hey,
that's great that you want to be faculty, but you know that's statically,
unlikely right?"  The ethics of the lack of information that is given to new
PhDs are troubling at best, but that is a topic for another section.

Typically you start out full of energy and optimism and if you're actually going
to make it out, you breeze through your classes.  Then you hit a wall.  Research
is nothing like classes.  There are no small check points, no midterm exams or
homeworks that give frequent positive feedback.  Your first paper probably gets
rejected, you don't know the related work and it seems like everyone knows more
than you.  Do you really belong here? Etc.  This typically occurs in your second
or third year.

##The End of Everyone's PhD is Different

In CS, most people end up leaving with a master's or going to industry even if
they get a PhD.  Both of these are "failures" in varying degrees in the eyes of
the academic.  This is evidenced by the preponderance of "Quit Lit,"  blogs and
open letters by people leaving academia.  The academic's view is that if you
leave academia, "something went wrong."  Quit Lit is an explanation of why
something went wrong.  People write goodbye letters in the private sector, but
they are farewell's to colleagues, not soul-baring confessions.

Whether you write the letters M-S or P-H-D after your name, or simply learned an
expensive lesson, you accomplished *something* in any case.  In the end, you
will feel a lot better than when you were having a crisis of faith in your second or
third year but never as happy/optimistic as you were your first year.

Many grad students that I've spoken to express uneasy feelings about leaving
academia.  This is more common among people who go directly from high school to
undergrad to grad school (versus having worked full time for a period before
starting grad school).  They partly fear the unknown, but I hypothesize that
they also experience something similar to people who leave a strict religion.
Academia provides a simple moral philosophy, a mental short cut to separate good
people/actions/things from bad people/actions/things.  Getting good grades,
publishing papers, getting grants, and getting tenure are all *good*.  Whoever
has the most papers/grants/tenure is a *better person*.  Like leaving academia,
leaving a religion means telling people in your inner circle that you reject
their moral philosophy.  Telling the people/person who had previously been
guiding your life that you're going to deviate from the course they plotted and
strike out on your own is difficult. The ex-academic must replace the moral
philosophy of academia with something else.  Making a lot of money for money's
sake isn't cool among the grad student cohort, so simply replacing your meager
stipend with a well paying job, isn't sufficient.  When on the path to tenure
track faculty, the grad student simply had to row as fast in the designated
direction as possible, in the outside world, determining in which direct to row is
the harder task.

#Your "Advisor" is your Boss

In a world where job titles are becoming increasingly bizarre, (ex: "VP of
People") the title "advisor" seems benign, but its actually a massive
oversimplification of a complex relationship.  

To quote Freakonomics, "people respond to incentives."  Your advisor's Plan A is
to put you into a tenure-track faculty position at a research university to
expand his sphere of influence in academia.  When this is what you want, and
you're on track to publish enough good papers to have a strong CV, everything is
great.  

When your plan becomes Plan B (anything but tenure-track faculty), either
through your own decision or setbacks in publishing, classes, or exams, it's not
necessarily smooth sailing anymore.  Your advisor's incentives push towards
trying to stay on Plan A until all hope is lost.  Even when you're definitely
leaving academia, they want to wring as many papers out of you as possible,
for publications to pad their CV.  However, almost no one outside of academia
actually reads papers, so its your incentive to graduate ASAP.  It's not
entirely bad for an advisor to encourage his students to not give up early, but
you should know that your advisor will give you their best advice among the 
possible advices that do not conflict with their own incentives.

The most insidious aspect the advisor/advisee relationship is that it is many
students to one advisor.  Your advisor can take on far greater risk than you.
He can have ten or more students at once but you're only one person.  Academia
prestige is heavily biases towards top-tier conferences and best paper awards.
The advisor can have ten (or more) students work for 3 years each on their own
projects and if one or two succeed and get awards and tenure-track jobs, that is
Mission Accomplished.  However, the other eight who failed might not see it that
way.  Grad student stipends are cheap and your advisor is to fund as many
students as his funding allows potentially never or very rarely actually
interacting with individual students.

##"Collaborating" and Author Order

##It is Better to be Lucky than Good

There is not evidence that suggests the academic system actually promotes the
best researchers.

People tend to believe a system which promoted them is a just system.

#Getting Published

##Selling (or Marketing)

Even among the most technical crowd, people are people.  People choose between
technically adequate alternatives emotionally, not rationally.

##Dealing with Weaknesses

Every paper has weaknesses.  Should a paper spell out its weaknesses in big bold
letters for all to see?  Some would say yes, that this is scientific integrity.
But consider a thought experiment.  You are an overworked reviewer (a junior
faculty at some research university).  This semester you're on four different
program committees (you "volunteered" to review 100 papers for free), teaching a
class, and managing five grad students.  You can spend 30 minutes per fifteen
page double columned paper.  Is it easier to find deficiencies in a paper that
explicitly states them, or one that omits them (stating only the pros, but not
the cons)?  Clearly it is harder (and more importantly time consuming) to deeply
understand the paper and analyze its weaknesses rather than just restate the
already admitted to weaknesses from the paper.  The only risk to the salesman
academic is being called out on it, which is again a lot more work for the
reviewer and requires considerably more confidence -- especially considering
paper submissions are anonymous. The reviewer doesn't if know they potentially
offending some senior faculty with greater power.

Game theory then says that one should fill their paper with the positive aspects
of their work and not mention negatives.  The question is if this is scientific.
I leave that question to the reader to answer.

##The Scientific Method vs Fishing Expeditions

Research is as much about finding interesting problems to solve as it is about
finding solutions to problems.

#Money

##Academic Funding is a Ponzi Scheme

##RAs, TAs, Fellowships, and Internships

#Further Reading

Matt Might's illustrated guide to a PhD

Philip Guo's PhD Grind

Keep in Survivor Bias in mind when reading any faculty's memoir of a PhD.
They're future success depends on talented people becoming graduate students.

#The Winners become Overworked Managers

